.TH ARD 1 "June 2026" "ard 1.0.0" "Arduino Helper Manual"
.SH NAME
ard \- compile, upload and monitor Arduino sketches
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ard
.I command
.RI [ sketch ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ard
is a thin wrapper around
.BR arduino-cli (1)
that bundles the compile, upload and serial\-monitor steps into one command and
removes the need to retype the board FQBN and serial port every time.
.PP
It works for any board: pass the FQBN with
.B \-b
or let
.B ard
auto\-detect a connected board with
.B "arduino-cli board list"
.RB ( --format
.IR json ).
The serial port is auto\-detected the same way, falling back to
.IR /dev/ttyACM0 .
.PP
A sketch is a folder containing a
.I <foldername>.ino
file. If the
.I sketch
argument is omitted,
.B ard
uses the current directory; if that is not a sketch (for example the project
root) it looks one level down and picks the single sketch it finds, or lists the
candidates if there is more than one.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B upload " " [\fIsketch\fR]
Compile and flash the board. Alias:
.BR up .
.TP
.B compile " " [\fIsketch\fR]
Compile only, do not flash. Alias:
.BR build .
.TP
.B flash " " [\fIsketch\fR]
Compile, flash, then open the serial monitor. Alias:
.BR run .
.TP
.B monitor
Open the serial monitor on the detected port. Alias:
.BR mon .
.TP
.B list
List connected boards. Aliases:
.BR boards ", " ls .
.TP
.B help
Show the built\-in help and exit.
.TP
.B version
Print the version and exit.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-fqbn " " \fIFQBN\fR
Board FQBN, for example
.IR arduino:renesas_uno:nanor4 " or " arduino:avr:uno .
Defaults to the auto\-detected board. A bare positional argument that looks like
.I packager:arch:board
is also treated as the FQBN.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-port " " \fIPORT\fR
Serial port. Defaults to the auto\-detected port, then
.IR /dev/ttyACM0 .
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-baud " " \fIRATE\fR
Serial monitor baud rate. Default
.IR 115200 .
Must match the
.B Serial.begin()
rate in the sketch.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B ard upload
Auto\-detect the board, build and flash the sketch in the current folder.
.TP
.B ard flash
As above, then open the serial monitor.
.TP
.B ard compile ~/sketches/Blink
Compile a specific sketch without flashing.
.TP
.B ard up \-b arduino:avr:uno
Force the board FQBN.
.TP
.B ard list
Show what is plugged in.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B ard
exits 0 on success and non\-zero on failure (unknown command, no sketch found,
or a failed
.BR arduino-cli (1)
step).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.local/bin/ard
Symlink onto the user PATH, pointing at the project copy in
.IR bin/ard .
.TP
.I /etc/udev/rules.d/70-arduino.rules
udev rule granting upload access to the USB bootloader. Without it an upload
fails with
.BR LIBUSB_ERROR_ACCESS .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR arduino-cli (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Luke McCann.
